Poul Henningsen
       1894-1967
      "From the age of 18, when I began to experiment with light, I have been 
      searching for harmony in lighting" 
      Poul Henningsen was born in 1894 in Ordrup, Denmark and became Denmark's 
      first expert in lighting theory. Even though Poul Henningsen's is mostly 
      known from his lamps his talent was very diversified. He was trained at 
      the Technical School and the Danish College of Technology, Copenhagen. 
      Ever since 1920 Poul Henningsen worked as an independent architect in 
      Copenhagen where he designed several houses, a factory, a part of Tivoli, 
      and the interiors of two theaters. Beside working as an architect Poul 
      Henningsen wrote articles for several newspapers and periodicals, he 
      scripted a number of revues for Copenhagen theaters, he wrote poems, and 
      was the editor of the magazine "Kritisk Revy" (Critical Revue). From his 
      writings Poul Henningsen was known as a seriously and sharp critical of 
      society and architecture. 
             "Human beings are like children as soon as they get new toys they 
            trough away their culture and the orgy starts. The electric light 
            gave the possibility of wallowing in light" 

      As a Copenhagener Poul Henningsen often drove through the city and was 
      shock by what he saw: 
      "When, in the evening, from the top of a tram car, you look into all the 
      homes on the first floor, you shudder at how dismal people's homes are. 
      Furniture, style carpets, everything in the home is unimportant compared 
      to the positioning of the lighting. It doesn't cost money to light a room 
      correctly, but it does require culture."
      "It has always been the idea that the PH-lamp should be the lamp for the 
      home. Due to its qualities and its modern appearance it had to be accepted 
      first in offices and public buildings, but it is constructed with the most 
      difficult and noble task in mind: lighting in the home. The aim is to 
      beautify the home and the who live there, to make the evening restful and 
      relaxing." 
      In 1924 Poul Henningsen designed his multi-shade lamp. It was the first of 
      what later became known as the "PH-lamp". The design was based on 
      scientific analysis of a lamp shade's function. The size, shape, and 
      position of the lamp shades determine the distribution of the light and 
      the amount of glare. In 1924 this lamp won a competition for light fitting 
      for the Paris World Exhibition, and is known as the "Paris lamp". Poul 
      Henningsen maintained the principle of the Paris lamp throughout his 
      lifetime. 
      "The task to find a new lighting feature, where the emphasis is on the 
      problem of glare. This is what is attempted with the PH-lamp, and much to 
      indicate that it has been successful." 
      Poul Henningsen's lamp shades are made of separate elements, shaped and 
      assembled in such a way that they cover the bulb and direct the light down 
      upon the table without the rays being reflected more than once. Beside 
      this they give a general light in the room, so that the contrast between 
      the illumination of the walls and table is not to sharp. Within the lamp 
      shade itself the light is distributed so as to lessen the intensity 
      towards the outer edge of each separate element. In this way Henningsen 
      has avoided the abrupt transition from light to darkness which we find, 
      for example, with an ordinary spherical pendant shade in opal glass. To 
      bring the rather harsh white light towards the red end of the spectrum, 
      Henningsen has given the inner side of one element of the shade a red 
      color. 
      Poul Henningsen did not grew up with the electric light but in the soft 
      glow of the petroleum lamp. His constant inspiration and aim was to 
      cultivate the electric light to achieve a similar softness but yet utilize 
      this new powerful light source. 
      "I do not subscribe to the idea of an ever-increasing demand for more 
      powerful lighting intensity. It is tempting, but inartistic to continue to 
      increase lighting intensity." 
      From Consulate General of Denmark in New York Copyright 1997, Consulate 
      General of Denmark. All rights reserved.

